Sj telemetry tale (#49)
interledger/interledger.org-developers: src/content/blog/2024-04-10-the-telemetry-tale.md

A significant issue emerged when considering scenarios where the maximum packet value could accommodate an entire transaction amount within a single packet. Such a case threatened to undermine our privacy safeguards. This underscored the complexity of our task and highlighted the necessity for formalized, privacy-preserving methodologies in our telemetry framework.

### Deep Dive into Privacy

Privacy is always important when it comes to financial transactions. It is not only about individual and institutional confidentiality, but it is also a protective mechanism against market manipulation. By concealing the specifics around transaction volumes and patterns we are preventing the exploitation of that information by market participants with enough information to influence prices or liquidity. With this in mind, we re-worked our strategy using a layered, privacy-centric approach. We also ensure all data anonymization occurs locally.

#### Packetization

> The Interledger Protocol (ILP) naturally anonymizes transactions by splitting larger transactions across multiple payment packets. Nevertheless, to cover scenarios where a transaction might be represented in a single packet, we've employed additional measures. 

Reviewer: should it say something like, "we've employed additional measures, described below"? Otherwise, it feels like a hard stop (i.e. "what are the additional measures?")

Author: I see your point. I worry I'm repeating myself already.
How about this, 
"The Interledger Protocol (ILP) naturally anonymizes transactions by splitting larger transactions across multiple payment packets. This only applies when the maximum value per ILP packet is smaller than the total transaction value. "

Author: ```suggestion
The Interledger Protocol (ILP) naturally anonymizes transactions by splitting larger transactions across multiple payment packets. This only applies when the maximum value per ILP packet is smaller than the total transaction value.
```

#### Bucketing and Rounding Technique

This method categorizes transaction values into "buckets" to protect privacy, with the bucket size dictating the rounding precision. For common, lower-value transactions, we use a linear scale to create closely spaced buckets, enabling detailed granularity. For less common, higher-value transactions that necessitate greater privacy, we switch to logarithmic scaling, resulting in wider bucket intervals. Extreme values are managed by "clipping," where values beyond set thresholds are grouped into maximum or minimum buckets, ensuring all values fall within predefined limits. Values are then rounded to a precision point that is determined by the nearest bucket edge.

E.g.
| Raw Value | Bucket Size | Rounded Value |
|-----------|-------------|---------------|
| 8300 | 10000 | 10000 |
| 13200 | 15000 | 15000 |
| 147700 | 160000 | 160000 |
| 1426100 | 2560000 | 2560000 |
| 1788200 | 2560000 | 2560000 |
| 90422400 | 10000000 | 90000000 |
| 112400400 | 10000000 | 100000000 |
| 222290500 | 10000000 | 100000000 |

#### Local Differential Privacy

> Fully activating nerd mode we read up on Local Differential Privacy (LDP). LDP is a variant of differential privacy where noise is added to each individual's data point locally before it is made available for collection. Once the data has been rounded we apply a random amount of noise to each data point. This noise is derived from the Laplacian distribution which is generated based on a privacy parameter that is relative to the size of the rounded value. This distribution is characterized by its sharp peak and exponential decay, which means that most of the noise added to the data will be relatively small, thus minimally impacting the overall utility of the data, while providing a strong guarantee of privacy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Fully activating nerd mode, we read up on Local Differential Privacy (LDP). LDP is a variant of differential privacy where noise is added to each individual's data point locally before it is made available for collection. Once the data has been rounded, we apply a random amount of noise to each data point. This noise is derived from the Laplacian distribution which is generated based on a privacy parameter that is relative to the size of the rounded value. This distribution is characterized by its sharp peak and exponential decay, which means that most of the noise added to the data will be relatively small, thus minimally impacting the overall utility of the data, while providing a strong guarantee of privacy.
```

For more information please have a look at our privacy [docs](https://github.com/interledger/rafiki/blob/main/packages/documentation/src/content/docs/telemetry/privacy.md) and our [implementation](https://github.com/interledger/rafiki/blob/main/packages/backend/src/telemetry/privacy.ts).

### Architecture and Instrumentation

> TODO: Image goes here

The [number of transactions](https://github.com/interledger/rafiki/blob/d3be6b8d151d8cebc32b862e52a7bb678674d48e/packages/backend/src/open_payments/payment/outgoing/lifecycle.ts#L84-L90) is extracted from the Open Payments outgoing payment lifecycle and the value metric is handled by a [telemetry middleware](https://github.com/interledger/rafiki/blob/d3be6b8d151d8cebc32b862e52a7bb678674d48e/packages/backend/src/payment-method/ilp/connector/core/middleware/telemetry.ts) layer inside the ILP connector core.

> Before these metrics are sent to the Otel collectors we’ve implemented local privacy-preserving measures, including:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In summary, before these metrics are sent to the Otel collectors we’ve implemented local privacy-preserving measures, including:
```

- rounding data to a precision point determined by bucketing
- local differential privacy in the form of adding Laplacian noise to anonymize transaction data

Finally, we grappled with the dilemma of disentangling playground data from our test network and live production data. The [Test Network](https://github.com/interledger/testnet) (Testnet) is an open Interledger network using test money within example wallet and e-commerce applications. Rafiki also provides a [local playground](https://github.com/interledger/rafiki/tree/main/localenv) to experiment with. We’d like to monitor activity within the testing environments to gauge interest in the Interledger Protocol (ILP) and identify usage patterns by new participants. We’ve opted to provide users the choice between the test network (testnet) and the live network (livenet). To support this dual-environment approach, the infrastructure for telemetry was effectively expanded to include two separate services: one dedicated to collecting and managing telemetry data from the test network and another for the live network. This setup ensures that data from each environment is handled independently.

> We’re using an AWS ECS Fargate deployment for our Telemetry Cluster. The cluster holds services for our two environments: livenet and testnet, both of them having a Network Load Balancer (NLB) in order to load-balance over their own set of ECS task replicas. By using an NLB instead of the Application Load Balancer (ALB), we are not taking the hit of parsing the L7 ([OSI Model](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OSI_model)) protocols and we do not have to do TLS termination at load balancer level. In our case, We just need to pass the data received to Prometheus, and application-layer routing decisions are not needed. Acting on L4 is of greater convenience, as all we need is the TCP packets being redirected to one of the running ECS tasks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We’re using an AWS ECS Fargate deployment for our Telemetry Cluster. The cluster holds services for our two environments: livenet and testnet, both of them having a Network Load Balancer (NLB) in order to load-balance over their own set of ECS task replicas. By using an NLB instead of the Application Load Balancer (ALB), we are not taking the hit of parsing the L7 ([OSI Model](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OSI_model)) protocols and we do not have to do TLS termination at load balancer level. In our case, we just need to pass the data received to Prometheus, and application-layer routing decisions are not needed. Acting on L4 is of greater convenience, as all we need is the TCP packets being redirected to one of the running ECS tasks.
```

Reviewer: Also, (personally) the part:

> By using an NLB instead of the Application Load Balancer (ALB), we are not taking the hit of parsing the L7 ([OSI Model](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OSI_model)) protocols and we do not have to do TLS termination at load balancer level. In our case, we just need to pass the data received to Prometheus, and application-layer routing decisions are not needed. Acting on L4 is of greater convenience, as all we need is the TCP packets being redirected to one of the running ECS tasks.

could use from a bit more context? A lot of acronyms all at once in here 😅

Reviewer 2: There is a misunderstanding.
It's not the case of a load balancer that knows where to route the data based on metric introspection/metadata, and then figures if it should send it to livenet or testnet.

But 2 load balancers, already assigned to one of the two environments. So the testnet load balancer just distributes metrics evenly across multiple testnet otel collectors, and the livenet load balancer just distributes the metrics evenly across multiple livenet otel collectors.

By having a LIVENET flag in the rafiki deployment, the rafiki instance already knows if it is sending to livenet or testnet. That distinction is done at client side, not in the load balancers.

"Our telemetry cluster is deployed on AWS, utilizing the ECS Fargate service to cater to two distinct operational environments: the live network environment (livenet) and the test network environment (testnet). To ensure efficient distribution of incoming network traffic across ECS task replicas within each environment, we employ Network Load Balancers (NLBs)."

The terms here might be a bit misleading, I will come back to this and try to rephrase

Author: Thanks so much for that clarification @beniaminmunteanu. How about this:

Our telemetry cluster is deployed on AWS, utilizing the ECS Fargate service to support two distinct operational environments: the live network environment (livenet) and the test network environment (testnet). To ensure efficient distribution of incoming network traffic across ECS task replicas within each environment, we employ Network Load Balancers (NLBs). The presence of a dedicated load balancer for each environment enables us to opt for NLBs over Application Load Balancers, effectively sidestepping the complexities associated with parsing application layer protocols (Layer 7 of the OSI model).

This strategic choice significantly impacts how we handle Transport Layer Security (TLS). In the case where the load balancer determines which environment the data should be sent to, managing TLS termination at the load balancer level would necessitate the decryption of incoming HTTPS traffic before passing it on to the backend servers in an unencrypted HTTP form. Such a process demands CPU resources for both decryption and HTTP traffic parsing, leading to increased resource usage and higher operational costs.

However, since the differentiation between environments (livenet and testnet) is managed by the Rafiki client and not within the load balancers, we leverage NLBs which operate at the transport layer. This approach removes the need for TLS termination at the load balancer, allowing us to establish a TLS secure channel directly with the services behind the load balancer (the respective Prometheus instance), rather than with the load balancer itself. Rafiki sends test data directly to the testnet environment and live data to the livenet environment. This configuration optimizes our resource utilization, leading to a more efficient and cost-effective telemetry infrastructure.

Reviewer 2: "This strategic choice significantly impacts how we handle Transport Layer Security (TLS). In the case where the load balancer determines which environment the data should be sent to based on the data itself, it would have to act as a TLS terminator, decrypting the incoming GRPC/HTTPS traffic and inspecting it before passing it on to the selected backend server. Such a process demands CPU resources for both decryption and parsing of the traffic before passing it on to the backend servers, leading to increased resource usage and higher operational costs"

I made some small adjustments here: 

- Wanted to make it clearer that the case for L7 would be when the distinction of environments is done by using information from the data itself. 

- Rephrased the Managing TLS termination part a bit

- Also, the communication between the load balancer and a backend server does not necessarily need to be unencrypted, more than often it ends up being encrypted as well, so I removed the "unencrypted HTTP" part

- Mentioned GRPC, since in our case that is the actual traffic, not HTTPS

Also, in the next paragraph:
"This approach removes the need for TLS termination at the load balancer, allowing us to establish a TLS secure channel directly with the services behind the load balancer (the respective Prometheus instance)," <--this part

The thing we connect to behind the load balancer is an ADOT collector, not the prometheus instance.
We are load balancing between multiple ADOT collectors. (more specifficaly, ECS Tasks that run an ADOT collector container).
So maybe just remove the "(the respective Prometheus instance)" and it's fine.

When integrating ASEs opt-in for telemetry, metrics are being sent to our Telemetry Service using gRPC. The collectors capture and export our data by periodically pushing it to an Amazon-managed Prometheus (AMP) instance for storage. Finally, Grafana Cloud is used to query Prometheus in order to visualize our data in dashboards. 

In order for ASEs to build their own telemetry solution, Rafiki can send data to multiple endpoints. This allows for integrating a local Otel collector container that acts as a sidecar and can support custom requirements.

Thus ASEs can choose to opt-in and send telemetry metrics to us, optionally collect metrics for their own personal use, or opt-out of telemetry entirely.

Please check out our telemetry [docs](https://github.com/interledger/rafiki/blob/main/packages/documentation/src/content/docs/telemetry/overview.md), [integration guide](https://github.com/interledger/rafiki/blob/main/packages/documentation/src/content/docs/telemetry/integrating.md), and our telemetry [code](https://github.com/interledger/rafiki/tree/main/packages/backend/src/telemetry) on GitHub.

### Reflecting on Our Journey

> A lot of what we’ve covered in this article could be construed as scope creep. What initially seemed like a straightforward goal evolved into a more complex and considered endeavor. I like to think that this is not a bad thing though. We are a team who have a proactive approach to understanding and resolving challenges. This journey is a testament to the iterative nature and necessary time that this process requires. That said, we could have benefited from more time upfront for understanding and planning instead of simply divining straight in. Perhaps, our work week eagerness may have led us to jump in too quickly. It is with a great sense of accomplishment that we now have telemetry running in our development environment where we are seeing how it holds up against our test data and hope it will be used in a production environment shortly. We look forward to having a real handle on the pulse of the ILP network soon. Of course, this journey is far from its conclusion. Telemetry, by its nature, is an ever-evolving domain, requiring adaptation to meet the network's growing needs and challenges. Having laid a solid foundation, future developments should be smoother. As we reflect on our path thus far, the question is: "Given our current knowledge and experiences, would we approach this project differently?"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A lot of what we’ve covered in this article could be construed as scope creep. What initially seemed like a straightforward goal evolved into a more complex and considered endeavor. I like to think that this is not a bad thing, though. We are a team who have a proactive approach to understanding and resolving challenges. This journey is a testament to the iterative nature and necessary time that this process requires. That said, we could have benefited from more time upfront for understanding and planning instead of simply diving straight in. Perhaps, our work week eagerness may have led us to jump in too quickly. It is with a great sense of accomplishment that we now have telemetry running in our development environment where we are seeing how it holds up against our test data and hope it will be used in a production environment shortly. We look forward to having a real handle on the pulse of the ILP network soon. Of course, this journey is far from its conclusion. Telemetry, by its nature, is an ever-evolving domain, requiring adaptation to meet the network's growing needs and challenges. Having laid a solid foundation, future developments should be smoother. As we reflect on our path thus far, the question is: "Given our current knowledge and experiences, would we approach this project differently?"
```

---
layout: ../../layouts/BlogLayout.astro
title: The Telemetry Tale
description: A journey into the metrics of Interledger
date: 2024-04-10
slug: the-telemetry-tale
author: Sarah Jones
author_url: https://www.linkedin.com/in/sarah-jones-ba6bb6b9
tags:
  - Interledger
  - Telemetry
---
## A Journey into the Metrics of Interledger

### Charting the Course

Rafiki is open-source software that enables Account Servicing Entities (ASEs), like digital wallet providers, to leverage [Interledger](https://interledger.org/interledger) functionality. Interledger creates interoperability between different payment systems and currencies, making payments easier, faster, and cheaper. We hope that by removing the friction of this integration, we can expand the adoption of Interledger and grow the network. This is where our tale begins, on a balmy August in 2023, with the Rafiki team united for our work week in Cluj-Napoca, Romania. In order to measure the growth of the network, we needed to capture its state over time: 

- how many transactions occurred on the network over the last week / month / year
- how much value flowed over the network in the last week / month / year

> Since telemetry was marked as a high-priority item, promises were made about completing the feature in the course of the week. We envisioned a streamlined process using managed services. With a few configuration and integration tweaks, we’d be up and running in no time, right? Not quite, as we soon accepted—it is a truth universally acknowledged that software development timelines are more aspirational than absolute. Telemetry was merged into main 6 months later. This article provides an account of our journey and an explanation of our final solution.

Reviewer 3: Very minor suggestion: Split into two sentences. "Not quite, as we soon accepted. It is a truth..."

Author: ```suggestion
Since telemetry was marked as a high-priority item, promises were made about completing the feature in the course of the week. We envisioned a streamlined process using managed services. With a few configuration and integration tweaks, we’d be up and running in no time, right? Not quite, as we soon accepted. It is a truth universally acknowledged that software development timelines are more aspirational than absolute. Telemetry was merged into main 6 months later. This article provides an account of our journey and an explanation of our final solution.
```

> The initial plan was to use OpenTelemetry collectors alongside AWS-managed Prometheus and Grafana. Our decision was driven by a commitment to flexibility, compatibility, and open standards. OpenTelemetry (Otel) is a standardized observability framework that is designed to provide a uniform way to capture and export telemetry data across various environments. We chose to use Prometheus and Grafana, but with Otel collectors, integrating Account Servicing Entities could send these metrics to different backends for their own use as well. Prometheus is a monitoring toolkit that stores the incoming metrics in its time-series database. It includes its own query language, PromQL, that enables detailed querying and analysis of the data. Grafana can query Prometheus directly using PromQL, allowing us to create visualizations of the collected metrics in dashboards. The open-source nature of these components aligns with Rafiki's principles, ensuring our telemetry stack not only meets our technical requirements but also reflects our commitment to open, accessible technology.

Author: ```suggestion
The initial plan was to use OpenTelemetry collectors alongside AWS-managed Prometheus and Grafana. Our decision was driven by a commitment to flexibility, compatibility, and open standards. OpenTelemetry (Otel) is a standardized observability framework that is designed to provide a uniform way to capture and export telemetry data across various environments. We chose to use Prometheus and Grafana, but with Otel collectors, integrating ASEs could send these metrics to different backends for their own use as well. Prometheus is a monitoring toolkit that stores the incoming metrics in its time-series database. It includes its own query language, PromQL, that enables detailed querying and analysis of the data. Grafana can query Prometheus directly using PromQL, allowing us to create visualizations of the collected metrics in dashboards. The open-source nature of these components aligns with Rafiki's principles, ensuring our telemetry stack not only meets our technical requirements but also reflects our commitment to open, accessible technology.
```

### Navigating Cloud Complexities

The allure of managed services began to fade as we grappled with their constraints. Managed services add complexities to troubleshooting, where the confluence of permissions, network access, and external service configurations can interplay in unexpected ways. Debugging became one of our biggest challenges. Throughout this process, Grafana was our only source of truth, serving as our sole beacon of verification for whether metrics were successfully being captured. Prometheus, acting as a managed-service intermediary, was an inscrutable black box. This was despite having activated every available logging feature within AWS. This meant that when we encountered issues it was not clear whether the problem lay in a breakdown in communication between Prometheus and Grafana or whether it was between the Otel SDK and Prometheus. To diagnose problems we had to redirect the Otel collector's Prometheus write URL to a BusyBox setup where we could perform a tcpdump to capture and inspect packets and verify if data was indeed being sent.

> We ran into a roadblock when we realized that AWS-managed Grafana does not allow for public dashboards. To resolve this we had to actually abandon AWS-managed Grafana and move over to Grafana Cloud. While they offered a workaround by editing the configuration to enable public dashboard access upon request—a process they handled with commendable responsiveness. Unfortunately, it still fell short by imposing limitations on embedding these dashboards on our own site. Despite Grafana Cloud’s responsive support team, we also encountered issues adding the AWS-Managed Prometheus as a data source. Our sigv4 authentication failed with a 403 Forbidden response, despite having the appropriate IAM permissions. The issue resolved spontaneously without clear intervention, implying an external factor (potentially AWS-side changes or maintenance) was at play. 

Reviewer 3: Sentence fragment: "While they offered a workaround by editing the configuration to enable public dashboard access upon request—a process they handled with commendable responsiveness."  Suggest removing "While" and adding "--" for "request--a process.."

Author: ```suggestion
We ran into a roadblock when we realized that AWS-managed Grafana does not allow for public dashboards. To resolve this we had to actually abandon AWS-managed Grafana and move over to Grafana Cloud. They offered a workaround by editing the configuration to enable public dashboard access upon request--a process they handled with commendable responsiveness. Unfortunately, it still fell short by imposing limitations on embedding these dashboards on our own site. Despite Grafana Cloud’s responsive support team, we also encountered issues adding the AWS-Managed Prometheus as a data source. Our sigv4 authentication failed with a 403 Forbidden response, despite having the appropriate IAM permissions. The issue resolved spontaneously without clear intervention, implying an external factor (potentially AWS-side changes or maintenance) was at play. 
```

You can view our public dashboard for test data telemetry [here](https://rafikitelemetry.grafana.net/public-dashboards/f70c8a6033b14da5a9f1cb974def602a).

Here is an example of how it looks:

> ![A screenshot the Testnet's telemetry dashboard](/developers/img/blog/2024-04-10/testnet-telemetry-dashboard-screenshot.png)

Author: ```suggestion
![A screenshot of Testnet's telemetry dashboard](/developers/img/blog/2024-04-10/testnet-telemetry-dashboard-screenshot.png)
```

Each column of our dashboard represents one of our metrics (number of transactions, value sent through the network, and average transaction value) measured over the last hour, day, week, and month respectively.

### Refining Our Course

As we moved past our infrastructure hurdles, our attention shifted towards decisions surrounding our approach to data collection. Initially, the idea of capturing transaction values in their original currencies seemed appealing. It promised insights into the diversity of currencies traversing the Interledger network and their respective volumes. Upon deeper reflection, we recognized the potential privacy implications of such granularity. Given the predominance of USD transactions, data on less common currencies could inadvertently reveal specifics about the activities of certain entities.

> To mitigate this risk and enhance data anonymity, we opted to standardize on USD as the base currency for all transactions. This decision introduced a new challenge: not all Account Servicing Entities (ASEs) might have the means to convert their transactions to USD. To address this, we incorporated a local rates conversion service. Unfortunately, we couldn’t find a free service that provides all the conversions we might want. So we've implemented an AWS Lambda function which runs daily, pulling data from our configured sources and then storing it in an Amazon S3 bucket. This setup positions us to seamlessly integrate additional data sources as needed by adding the new data source to our Lambda function. Currency conversions are processed internally within the Rafiki instance itself, maintaining confidentiality from public exposure.

Reviewer 3: Same comment here re ASE

Author: ```suggestion
To mitigate this risk and enhance data anonymity, we opted to standardize on USD as the base currency for all transactions. This decision introduced a new challenge: not all ASEs might have the means to convert their transactions to USD. To address this, we incorporated a local rates conversion service. Unfortunately, we couldn’t find a free service that provides all the conversions we might want. So we've implemented an AWS Lambda function which runs daily, pulling data from our configured sources and then storing it in an Amazon S3 bucket. This setup positions us to seamlessly integrate additional data sources as needed by adding the new data source to our Lambda function. Currency conversions are processed internally within the Rafiki instance itself, maintaining confidentiality from public exposure.
```

> While we were extracting transaction counts at the level of individual payments, we recognized that tracking transaction values at this level compromised privacy by revealing the full transaction value amount. Finding an optimal location to extract the value metric was not straightforward. We were initially unsure of collecting our metrics at the ILP packet level since this layer did not readily expose the asset’s scale and currency information that we needed to get all value metrics into a comparable form. So we shifted our focus to the accounting layer. This layer processes the outcomes of packet layer interactions (such as successfully delivered packets and failed or rejected transfers) and converts these activities into financial records. We considered embedding our telemetry logic directly within this layer, but ultimately decided to rather maintain a better separation of concerns by building telemetry its own middleware. Using a middleware layer also gave us greater flexibility in exposing the full context we needed which opened up the possibility of using the ILP connector core to extract our value metrics at packet level. Connectors apply currency exchange as needed and forward ILP packets from the sender to the receiver through the Interledger network. Positioning our data extraction at a packet level ensured that data from a single transaction, potentially spread across multiple packets, or data from various transactions occurring simultaneously, could not be traced back to a specific single payment. 

Reviewer 3: Suggest removing "rather": "...but ultimately decided to maintain a better separation..."

A significant issue emerged when considering scenarios where the maximum packet value could accommodate an entire transaction amount within a single packet. Such a case threatened to undermine our privacy safeguards. This underscored the complexity of our task and highlighted the necessity for formalized, privacy-preserving methodologies in our telemetry framework.

### Deep Dive into Privacy

> Privacy is always important when it comes to financial transactions. It is not only about individual and institutional confidentiality, but it is also a protective mechanism against market manipulation. By concealing the specifics around transaction volumes and patterns we are preventing the exploitation of that information by market participants with enough information to influence prices or liquidity. With this in mind, we re-worked our strategy using a layered, privacy-centric approach. We also ensure all data anonymization occurs locally.

Author: ```suggestion
Privacy is always important when it comes to financial transactions. It is not only about individual and institutional confidentiality, but it is also a protective mechanism against market manipulation. Concealing transaction volume and pattern specifics allows us to prevent market participants from using the information to influence prices or liquidity. With this in mind, we re-worked our strategy using a layered, privacy-centric approach. We also ensure all data anonymization occurs locally.
```

E.g.
| Raw Value | Bucket Size | Rounded Value |
|-----------|-------------|---------------|
| 8300 | 10000 | 10000 |
| 13200 | 15000 | 15000 |
| 147700 | 160000 | 160000 |
| 1426100 | 2560000 | 2560000 |
| 1788200 | 2560000 | 2560000 |
| 90422400 | 10000000 | 90000000 |
| 112400400 | 10000000 | 100000000 |
| 222290500 | 10000000 | 100000000 |

#### Local Differential Privacy

Fully activating nerd mode, we read up on Local Differential Privacy (LDP). LDP is a variant of differential privacy where noise is added to each individual's data point locally before it is made available for collection. Once the data has been rounded, we apply a random amount of noise to each data point. This noise is derived from the Laplacian distribution which is generated based on a privacy parameter that is relative to the size of the rounded value. This distribution is characterized by its sharp peak and exponential decay, which means that most of the noise added to the data will be relatively small, thus minimally impacting the overall utility of the data, while providing a strong guarantee of privacy.

> Central to our privacy framework is the empowerment of ASEs with the informed ability to opt-in or opt-out of the telemetry service. We also only collect data on outgoing payments, thus honoring the preferences of those who may choose to disable telemetry. In other words if one ASE enables telemetry and receives payments from an entity who has not enabled telemetry we won’t collect metrics on those incoming payments. 

Reviewer 3: Instead of "the empowerment of ASEs with..." suggestion: "empowering ASEs with..."

Author: ```suggestion
Central to our privacy framework is empowering of ASEs with the informed ability to opt-in or opt-out of the telemetry service. We also only collect data on outgoing payments, thus honoring the preferences of those who may choose to disable telemetry. In other words if one ASE enables telemetry and receives payments from an entity who has not enabled telemetry we won’t collect metrics on those incoming payments. 
```

For more information please have a look at our privacy [docs](https://github.com/interledger/rafiki/blob/main/packages/documentation/src/content/docs/telemetry/privacy.md) and our [implementation](https://github.com/interledger/rafiki/blob/main/packages/backend/src/telemetry/privacy.ts).

### Architecture and Instrumentation

![The Rafiki telemetry architecture](/developers/img/blog/2024-04-10/telemetry-architecture.png)

The [number of transactions](https://github.com/interledger/rafiki/blob/d3be6b8d151d8cebc32b862e52a7bb678674d48e/packages/backend/src/open_payments/payment/outgoing/lifecycle.ts#L84-L90) is extracted from the Open Payments outgoing payment lifecycle and the value metric is handled by a [telemetry middleware](https://github.com/interledger/rafiki/blob/d3be6b8d151d8cebc32b862e52a7bb678674d48e/packages/backend/src/payment-method/ilp/connector/core/middleware/telemetry.ts) layer inside the ILP connector core.

> In summary, before these metrics are sent to the Otel collectors we’ve implemented local privacy-preserving measures, including:

Reviewer 3: Comma between "...to the Otel collectors, we've implemented..."

Author: ```suggestion
In summary, before these metrics are sent to the Otel collectors, we’ve implemented local privacy-preserving measures, including:
```

Our telemetry clusters are deployed on AWS, utilizing the ECS Fargate service to support two distinct operational environments: the live network environment (livenet) and the test network environment (testnet). Since the two environments are separate, it is the Rafiki client that determines where to send the data and the load balancers themselves do not need to decrypt GRPC/HTTPS messages to direct traffic between environments. This way each environment has its own load balancer to simply load-balance over their set of ECS task replicas. This configuration maintains good separation between testnet and livenet data as well as optimizing our resource utilization, leading to a cleaner, more efficient, and cost-effective telemetry infrastructure.

> When integrating ASEs opt-in for telemetry, metrics are being sent to our Telemetry Services using gRPC. The collectors capture and export our data by periodically pushing it to an Amazon-managed Prometheus (AMP) instance for storage. Finally, Grafana Cloud is used to query Prometheus in order to visualize our data in dashboards. 

Reviewer 3: "...metrics are sent..." instead of "...metrics are being sent..."

Author: ```suggestion
When integrating ASEs opt-in for telemetry, metrics are sent to our Telemetry Services using gRPC. The collectors capture and export our data by periodically pushing it to an Amazon-managed Prometheus (AMP) instance for storage. Finally, Grafana Cloud is used to query Prometheus in order to visualize our data in dashboards. 
```

- rounding data to a precision point determined by bucketing
- local differential privacy in the form of adding Laplacian noise to anonymize transaction data

Finally, we grappled with the dilemma of disentangling playground data from our test network and live production data. The [Test Network](https://github.com/interledger/testnet) (Testnet) is an open Interledger network using test money within example wallet and e-commerce applications. Rafiki also provides a [local playground](https://github.com/interledger/rafiki/tree/main/localenv) to experiment with. We’d like to monitor activity within the testing environments to gauge interest in the Interledger Protocol (ILP) and identify usage patterns by new participants. We’ve opted to provide users the choice between the test network (testnet) and the live network (livenet). To support this dual-environment approach, the infrastructure for telemetry was effectively expanded to include two separate services: one dedicated to collecting and managing telemetry data from the test network and another for the live network. This setup ensures that data from each environment is handled independently.

> We’re using an AWS ECS Fargate deployment for our Telemetry Cluster. The cluster holds services for our two environments: livenet and testnet, both of them having a Network Load Balancer (NLB) in order to load-balance over their own set of ECS task replicas. By using an NLB instead of the Application Load Balancer (ALB), we are not taking the hit of parsing the L7 ([OSI Model](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OSI_model)) protocols and we do not have to do TLS termination at load balancer level. In our case, we just need to pass the data received to Prometheus, and application-layer routing decisions are not needed. Acting on L4 is of greater convenience, as all we need is the TCP packets being redirected to one of the running ECS tasks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Understanding Terminology**

In our telemetry deployment, it's important to understand several key terms:

- **Cluster**: This is the foundation of our ECS deployment. A cluster is a group of virtual or physical machines (known as container instances) that hosts the containerized applications.

- **Service**: Each service represents a distinct component of our telemetry infrastructure. In ECS, a service is responsible for defining how tasks (instances of containers) are run and maintained. Services are created based on ECS Task Definitions.

- **ECS Task**: A task is the smallest unit of deployment in ECS. It represents a single instance of a container running on an ECS cluster.

- **ECS Task Definition**: This is a blueprint that defines how an ECS task should be configured and run. It includes specifications such as which container images to use, CPU and memory requirements, networking configuration, and more.

- **ADOT Collector**: An ADOT (Amazon Distributed OpenTelemetry) collector is a component responsible for collecting telemetry data from various sources, such as applications and infrastructure services. It standardizes and exports this data to a monitoring backend for further analysis and visualization.

## How We Use the Above Mentioned

Within our telemetry deployment, our ECS cluster hosts two distinct services: Livenet Service and Testnet Service. Each service comprises one or more ECS tasks running on the cluster. These tasks are defined by their respective ECS task definitions, specifying them as ADOT collector containers. Notably, these containers are customized to route data to either the livenet or testnet Prometheus instance, ensuring data segregation based on environment.

Each service is associated with its own Network Load Balancer (NLB), which ensures that incoming traffic is distributed among the ECS tasks within the service.

## Why Network Load Balancer (NLB)?

We've opted for NLB over the Application Load Balancer (ALB) for several reasons:

- **Layer 4 (L4) Load Balancing**: NLB operates at the transport layer of the OSI model, meaning it focuses solely on routing traffic based on IP addresses and TCP/UDP ports. This enables efficient handling of TCP packets without the need to interpret the content of the packets, which reduces computational overhead and improves performance.

- **TLS Termination**: Unlike ALB, NLB does not require TLS termination. This means that the load balancer does not need a certificate for decrypting incoming TLS traffic. Since our objective is solely to forward encrypted traffic without making routing decisions based on its content, bypassing TLS termination simplifies the process by eliminating the need for decryption and subsequent re-encryption at the load balancer. This streamlined approach ensures efficient transmission of encrypted data to the backend services without additional processing overhead.

```

Author: Thanks Beni but I worry this explanation is very long and detailed. If we need to really dig into this it almost feels like we could consider a follow up blog post?

Author: ```suggestion
Our telemetry cluster is deployed on AWS, utilizing the ECS Fargate service to support two distinct operational environments: the live network environment (livenet) and the test network environment (testnet). Since the two environments are separate, it is the Rafiki client that determines where to send the data. This way each environment has its own load balancer to handle incoming traffic and the load balancers themselves do not need to decrypt HTTPS traffic to determine where it needs to go. This allows us to establish a TLS secure channel directly with the services behind the load balancers (the respective Prometheus instances), rather than with a load balancer itself. This configuration optimizes our resource utilization, leading to a more efficient and cost-effective telemetry infrastructure. 
```

> We’re using an AWS ECS Fargate deployment for our Telemetry Cluster. The cluster holds services for our two environments: livenet and testnet, both of them having a Network Load Balancer (NLB) in order to load-balance over their own set of ECS task replicas. By using an NLB instead of the Application Load Balancer (ALB), we are not taking the hit of parsing the L7 ([OSI Model](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OSI_model)) protocols and we do not have to do TLS termination at load balancer level. In our case, we just need to pass the data received to Prometheus, and application-layer routing decisions are not needed. Acting on L4 is of greater convenience, as all we need is the TCP packets being redirected to one of the running ECS tasks.

Author: ```suggestion
Our telemetry cluster is deployed on AWS, utilizing the ECS Fargate service to support two distinct operational environments: the live network environment (livenet) and the test network environment (testnet). Since the two environments are separate, it is the Rafiki client that determines where to send the data. This way each environment has its own load balancer to handle incoming traffic and the load balancers themselves do not need to decrypt GRPC/HTTPS traffic to determine where it needs to go. This allows us to establish a TLS secure channel directly with the services behind the load balancers, rather than with a load balancer itself. This configuration optimizes our resource utilization, leading to a more efficient and cost-effective telemetry infrastructure. 
```

> When integrating ASEs opt-in for telemetry, metrics are being sent to our Telemetry Service using gRPC. The collectors capture and export our data by periodically pushing it to an Amazon-managed Prometheus (AMP) instance for storage. Finally, Grafana Cloud is used to query Prometheus in order to visualize our data in dashboards. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When integrating ASEs opt-in for telemetry, metrics are being sent to our Telemetry Services using gRPC. The collectors capture and export our data by periodically pushing it to an Amazon-managed Prometheus (AMP) instance for storage. Finally, Grafana Cloud is used to query Prometheus in order to visualize our data in dashboards. 
```
